 MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS AND AC0 CIRCUITS GIVEN A TRUTH TABLE

  ERIC ALLENDER, LISA HELLERSTEIN, PAUL MC¡CABE §, TONIANN PITASSI ¶, AND MICHAEL
                                                                  SAKS

     Abstract. For circuit classes R, the fundamental computational problem Min-R asks for the minimum R-size of
a Boolean function presented as a truth table. Prominent examples of this problem include Min-DNF, which asks
whether a given Boolean function presented as a truth table has a k-term DNF, and Min-Circuit (also called MCSP),
which asks whether a Boolean function presented as a truth table has a size k Boolean circuit. We present a new
reduction proving that Min-DNF is NP-complete. It is significantly simpler than the known reduction of Masek [31],
which is from Circuit-SAT. We then give a more complex reduction, yielding the result that Min-DNF cannot be
approximated to within a factor smaller than ¢ log N £  , for some constant  ¤ 0, assuming that NP is not contained
in quasipolynomial time. The standard greedy algorithm for Set Cover is often used in practice to approximate Min-
DNF. The question of whether Min-DNF can be approximated to within a factor of o¢ log N £ remains open, but we
construct an instance of Min-DNF on which the solution produced by the greedy algorithm is ¢ log N £ larger than
optimal. Finally, we extend known hardness results for Min-TCd0 to obtain new hardness results for Min-AC0d , under
cryptographic assumptions.

     Key words. Machine learning theory, complexity theory, approximation algorithms, truth table minimization.

     AMS subject classifications. 68Q17,68Q32,03D15

     1. Introduction. A fundamental computational problem is to determine the minimum
size of a Boolean function in some representation, given a truth table for the function. Two
prominent examples are Min-DNF, which asks whether a Boolean function presented as a
truth table has a k-term DNF; and Min-Circuit (also called MCSP, for Minimum Circuit Size
Problem), which asks whether a Boolean function presented as a truth table has a size k
Boolean circuit. By varying the representation class, we can obtain a hierarchy of problems
between Min-DNF and Min-Circuit, including such problems as Min-AC0, Min-TC0, and
Min-NC1.

     The main focus of this paper is the Min-DNF problem. Min-DNF is the decision version
of finding the smallest DNF formula consistent with a truth table, where the size of a DNF
formula is considered to be the number of terms in it. This is a classic problem in com-
puter science and circuit design. Heuristic approaches to solving this problem range from the
Karnaugh maps of the 1960's to state-of-the-art software packages (cf. [14]).

     Masek proved Min-DNF to be NP-complete in the 1970's [31]. This result was cited by
Garey and Johnson [19] and is widely known, but Masek never published his proof. More
recently, Czort presented a modernized, more readable version of Masek's proof [15] (see also
[43]). Masek's proof is by direct reduction from Circuit-SAT, using gadget constructions, and
even in Czort's version it is long and involved. We present a new, simple NP-completeness
proof for Min-DNF by reduction from 3-Partite Set Cover (or, more particularly, from 3D-

   ¥
     A preliminary version of this paper appeared in the Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Computational
Comlexity [3]
   Computer Science Department, Rutgers University (¦¨§©§  ¨ ¨¨ ©!"¨# ©$ ¨% & !' # ). Supported in part by NSF
Grant CCF-0514155.
   Computer Science Department, Polytechnic University (()0 $¨)21    1 !4&3 ©5 §67' # ). Part of this research was
conducted while L. Hellerstein was on sabbatical at the Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison.
   §Computer Science Department, University of Toronto (03 98 ©¦ @©©! "$550¨$A5 ' # ). Research supported by
NSERC.
   ¶Computer Science Department, University of Toronto ($ 50BC1  © ! "$ 5 50¨$ 5A'  # ). Research supported by
NSE¡ RC and PREA.
     Department of Mathematics, Rutgers University (¦ )D  E 8F¦ $ G( "#¨©$ %¨& !' B# H . Supported in part by NSF Grant
CCR-0515201
2  MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

Matching).

     It is well-known that Min-DNF can be viewed as a special case of Set Cover, and that

the greedy Set Cover algorithm can be applied to Min-DNF to produce a DNF with O logN¡
times as many terms as the optimal, where N is the size (number of entries) of the input truth

table. This prompts the question of whether a better approximation factor can be achieved.

Czort considered this question, but showed only that unless P ¢ NP, the size of the smallest
DNF cannot be approximated to within an additive constant k [15]. We also give a more

complicated reduction (again from a restricted version of Set Cover) that allows us to prove

the following inapproximability result for Min-DNF: If NP is not contained in quasipolyno-
mial time, then Min-DNF cannot be approximated to within a factor smaller than logN ¡  for
some constant  £ 0, where N is the size of the input truth table.

     There is a gap between our ¤ logN ¡  ¡ inapproximability lower bound for Min-DNF,
and the O logN¡ upper bound of the greedy Set Cover algorithm. Closing this gap remains an
open question. We do, however, construct an instance of Min-DNF for which the greedy Set
Cover algorithm produces a DNF formula that has  log N ¡ times as many terms as the opti-
mal. The greedy Set Cover algorithm is commonly used as a heuristic for solving Min-DNF
in practice. We also prove an ¦¥ log N ¡ inapproximability lower bound for Min-DNF under
the additional assumption that a restriction of Set Cover is  log n¡ -hard to approximate.

     Although the general Min-DNF problem is NP-hard, for k ¢ O§¥ log N¡ it is tractable

[20]. Using a simple padding argument, we show hardness results for Min-DNF where k ¢
 logN ¡ . The question of whether Min-DNF is tractable for k ¢ logN remains open. This
question was posed in [20]; a negative result would imply that logn-term DNF cannot be

learned with membership and proper equivalence queries.
     In addition to our results for Min-DNF, we also prove a result for Min-ACd0 for all suf-

ficiently large d. Under cryptographic assumptions, it is known that Min-Circuit, Min-NC1
and Min-TCd0 are not polynomial-time solvable [4]. (Nothing is stated explicitly in [4] regard-
ing Min-TCd0, but it is implicit.) We extend the hardness results for Min-TCd0 to obtain new
hardness results for Min-AC0d, under cryptographic assumptions. This still leaves open the in-
teresting question of whether Min-Circuit (or the other problems) are NP-complete. Kabanets

and Cai [24] give evidence that such a reduction will not be straightforward.

     The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we define the relevant mini-
mization problems and present necessary background. In Section 3 we present our new proof

that Min-DNF is NP-hard. In Section 4 we present our hardness results for approximating

Min-DNF. In Section 5 we give our construction of the instance of Min-DNF on which the
greedy Set Cover algorithm produces an  logN ¡ factor approximation. Section 6 concerns
the fixed parameter versions of Min-DNF. Our hardness results for Min-ACd0 appear in Section
8. Conclusions are in Section 9.

     A preliminary version of this paper appeared in [3]. Feldman independently proved
an ¨ log N¡  ¡ factor inapproximability result for Min-DNF [18] using related techniques.
Feldman's result is based on the assumption P ¢© NP, rather than on the assumption that NP is

not contained in quasipolynomial time. Feldman also proved new results on proper learning
of DNF, which are discussed in Section 7.

     2. Preliminaries. We begin with a few definitions. The set  1¤¨¤¨ n is denoted by  n .
We use the bitwise ordering on vectors: for v w  0 1 n, we write v  w if vi  wi for all
i    n . Let Vn ¢  x1 ¤ ¨ ¤ ¨ xn  . A prime implicant T of a function f x1 ¨ ¤ ¨!  xn ¡ is a conjunction
of literals over the variables Vn such that T ¢ 1 " f ¢ 1, and removing any literal from T
violates this property. (In the literature, prime implicants are sometimes called minterms).
A DNF formula over the variables Vn is a formula  ¢ T1 # T2 # ¨¤  Tk for some k, where
T1 ¨ ¤ ¨ !  Tk are each conjunctions of literals over Vn. Each Ti in  is a term of  . Every Boolean
MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS  3

function f can be expressed by a DNF formula in which every term is a prime implicant of
f . The size of a DNF formula is the number of terms in it; for a Boolean function or partial
function f , dnf-size f ¡ denotes the size of the smallest DNF formula consistent with f . The
class of Boolean circuits ACd0 consists of all depth-d circuits of AND and OR gates with
arbitrary fan-in.

     The classic Set Cover optimization problem is, given input ¡ £ ¢ ¡ , where ¢ is a finite
universe, and is a collection of subsets of ¢ , find a smallest subcollection ¦ ¤ § ¥ , such
that that the union of the sets in ¤ equals ¢ . It is NP-hard to approximate Set Cover to within
a factor smaller than c logn, where c is a constant and n is the size of the input (cf. [7]). On
the other hand, there is a simple greedy algorithm that achieves an O log n¡ approximation
for Set Cover [22, 29, 13].

     For r a positive integer, the r-Uniform Set Cover problem is as follows: on input n k¡ ¡
where n and k are positive integers and is a set of subsets of  n , each subset having size r,
determine whether there is a subcollection ¨ ¤ © ¥ of size at most k whose union is  n . The
r-Partite Set Cover problem is a restriction: on input n k  ¡ where n and k are positive
integers,  is a partition of  n into r sets, and is a collection of subsets of  n , where every
subset contains exactly one element from each of the sets of , determine whether there is a
subcollection ¨ ¤ ¥© of size at most k whose union is  n . The 3D-Matching problem is the
NP-complete restriction of 3-Partite Set Cover where k ¢ n 3 (cf. [19]).

     We consider a general family of computational problems of the form Min-R(S) where
the input is a Boolean function with input representation from S, and the output should be a
minimum representation of the function from R. For example, Min-DNF(tt) is the problem
of determining a smallest DNF representation of a Boolean function f on n variables, if f is
presented as a truth table of size N ¢ 2n. Our default input representation will be the truth
table representation and when we write Min-R, rather than Min-R(S), we will assume the
default input representation.

     We focus primarily on DNF minimization. We consider the following four variations:

Min-DNF(A): The input is a total Boolean function, specified by explicitly listing all 1's of
          the function. That is, A ¥  0 1 n is the input, and we look for a minimum DNF
          that realizes the total function fA, where fA a¡ ¢ 1 for a  A, and fA b¡ ¢ 0 for
          b   0 1 n  A.

Min-DNF: In the full-truth table version, the input is the entire truth table of f :  0 1 n 
            0 1 , and we look for a minimum DNF that realizes the function f .

Min-DNF(A,B): The input is a partial Boolean function, specified by listing the 1's and 0's
          of the function, and we look for a minimum DNF that is consistent with the input.
          That is, A B ¥  0 1 n is the input, and we look for a minimum DNF that realizes a
          function f :  0 1 n   0 1 , where f a¡ ¢ 1 for a  A and f b¡ ¢ 0 for b  B.

Min-DNF(*): The input is a partial Boolean function, specified by the entire truth table of
           f :  0 1 n   0 1  , where f a¡ ¢ means that the value of f is not defined on
          a. We look for a minimum DNF that realizes a function f  :  0 1 n   0 1 , where
           f  a¡ ¢ 1 for a  f  1 1¡ and f  b¡ ¢ 0 for b  f  1 0¡ . Note that as in the A B¡
          version, the input here also specifies a partial function, but now the partial function
          is specified by a 2n sized input, regardless of the size of the domain of the partial
          function.

     The decision versions of the above problems ask, given a function f and a natural number
k, whether or not there is a DNF formula realizing f that has at most k terms. All decision ver-
sions are easily seen to lie in NP. It is also easy to see that Min-DNF is a special case of Min-
DNF(*) and therefore reduces to Min-DNF(*), and Min-DNF(*) reduces to Min-DNF(A,B).
Also Min-DNF reduces to Min-DNF(A). Thus NP-hardness of Min-DNF implies NP-hardness
4  MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

of all other versions. The first three of the above problems are covered by Czort [15] in an
excellent survey of previous related work. There is a hodgepodge of interesting but incompa-
rable hardness results that are known for versions of DNF minimization, dating back to the
1960's. The simplest of these is the NP-hardness of the A B¡ version due to Pitt and Valiant
[35]. As shown by Czort, there is also a clean NP-hardness proof of the A version that follows
from a reduction of Gimpel. Masek [31] proved the NP-completeness of Min-DNF. In terms
of inapproximability, Pitt and Valiant's proof of the A B¡ hardness result preserves solution
values and thus shows the NP-hardness of achieving a factor n approximation. Neither of
the other two NP-hardness proofs (for the A version or for Min-DNF) give much in the way
of inapproximability results.

     A starting point for this paper is the well-known observation that Min-DNF easily reduces
to Set Cover, and in fact can be viewed as a special case of Set Cover. Given the truth table
of a Boolean function f over n variables, all prime implicants of f can be generated in time
2O n¡ . Each prime implicant can then be viewed as a subset of  0 1 n (corresponding to those
inputs that satisfy the prime implicant). Thus given all the prime implicants, finding a smallest
DNF is equivalent to finding a smallest cover for these prime implicant sets. Applying the
standard greedy algorithm for Set Cover, it follows that Min-DNF can be approximated to
within a factor of O logN¡ , where N is the size (number of entries) of the truth table.

     For a partial Boolean function f , the prime implicants of f are the prime implicants of
the total function f  that satisfies f  £x¢ ¡ ¢ 1 iff f ¤x¢ ¡ ¢ 1 # f ¤x¢ ¡ ¢  . Every partial function f
has a smallest consistent DNF whose terms are prime implicants of f . The greedy Set Cover
algorithm can also be used to approximate Min-DNF(*) in the same way that it is applied
to Min-DNF, except that it chooses sets that cover the maximum number of 1's of the input
function (i.e. it ignores  's when greedily choosing sets).

     The pseudocode for applying the greedy Set Cover algorithm to Min-DNF and Min-
DNF(*) is shown below. The input is the full truth table of a Boolean function or partial
function f .

   1: ¥ :¢  T ¦ T is a prime implicant of f 
   2:  :¢¨§
   3: while  does not cover all 1's of f do
   4: let T ©  ¥ cover the most uncovered 1's of f
   5:  :¢  # T
   6: end while
   7: return 

                                     FIG. 2.1. Greedy Min-DNF and Min-DNF(*) algorithm

     3. Simple proof that Min-DNF is NP-complete. Our new proof that Min-DNF is NP-
complete is a modification of the reduction of Gimpel mentioned above, which was was used
by Czort to prove the NP-completeness of the A version of DNF minimization [15].

     We start by briefly describing Gimpel's reduction. It can be viewed as consisting of two
phases. In the first phase, an instance ¢ ¡ of Set Cover over the ground set ¢ ¢  n is
mapped to a partial function f , as follows. First, both the sets as well as the ground elements
are mapped to truth assignments in  0 1 n, such that a set covers a ground element in  n if
and only if the assignment corresponding to the ground element is less than the assignment
corresponding to the set (where comparison of assignments is with respect to the bitwise
ordering of the vectors). Each ground element i   n is mapped to the assignment that is all
zero except for bit i, which is 1. Each set is mapped to the assignment corresponding to the
                                 MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                           5

characteristic function of the set. The 1's of f are those assignments corresponding to ground
elements; the  's of f are those assignments  such that    for some  corresponding to
a set; and the remaining truth assignments are zeroes of f . It can be shown that the size of
the minimum DNF consistent with the partial function f is equal to the minimum size of the
cover for the input instance of Set Cover.

     In the second phase of Gimpel's reduction, the partial function f is mapped to a total
function, g. We give the details of g below in Section 3.2. The truth table size of f and
g are exponential in the size of the Set Cover instance from the first phase. Thus Gimpel's
reduction does not give a hardness result for Min-DNF. As Czort notes, it does, however, give
a hardness result for Min-DNF(A), provided that we begin the reduction not from the general
Set Cover problem, but from 3-Uniform Set Cover .

     Our reduction proving that Min-DNF is NP-complete also has two phases. The first
phase is similar to that of Gimpel. The main difference is that we need a much more compact
mapping from the sets and ground elements of the Set Cover instance onto truth assignments,
to ensure that the size of the truth table for the resulting function is only polynomial in the
size of the input Set Cover instance. To do such a compact mapping in a simple way, we
reduce from 3-Partite Set Cover, rather than from 3-Uniform Set Cover. The second phase of
our reduction is essentially identical to Gimpel's.

     3.1. Reducing 3-Partite Set Cover to Min-DNF(*). In the first phase of our reduction,
we reduce 3-Partite Set Cover to Min-DNF(*). We note that our reduction from 3-Partite Set
Cover would also work from 3D-Matching. We use the following lemma, which is implicit
in Gimpel's reduction:

     LEMMA 3.1. Let be a set of subsets of  n . Let t £ 0 and let V ¢  vi : i   n  and
W ¢  wA : A   be sets of vectors from  0 1 t satisfying

           (*) For all A  and i   n , i  A iff vi  wA
Let R ¢  x  0 1 t ¦ x © V and for some w  W  x  w . Let f be a partial function with
domain  0 1 t such that f x¡ ¢ 1 if x  V , f x¡ ¢  if x  R, and f x¡ ¢ 0 otherwise. Then

    has a cover of size m if and only if there is an m-term DNF consistent with f .

Proof. For u   0 1 t, let D u¡ ¢  w : w  u and let  u¡ denote the DNF term
 ¡ ¢ i:ui 0 xi. Note that D
¤£ ¥ vectors D U ¡ ¢ u U D   u¡  is exactly the set of satisfying assignments of   u¡ . For a set U of
                             u¡  . By (*), we have that V ¥ D W ¡ . Also, f x¡ ¢   iff x  D W ¡  V .

Given a cover ¤¦§ ¥ of size m, the m-term DNF whose terms are   wC ¡ ¦ C  ¤  is

easily seen to be consistent with f . Conversely, suppose  is an m-term DNF consistent with

f . For each term    , let u  ¡ be the maximal vector satisfying . Since  is consistent
with f , we have that u  ¡  D W ¡ , so there must be a set S  ¡  for which u  ¡  wS ¡ .

We claim that  S  ¡ :     is a cover of . Let j  n . We must show that j is covered.

The consistency of  implies that v j is satisfied by some term  j   . This implies v j  u  j ¡ .
Thus v j  wS j ¡ , which by (*) implies j  S  j ¡ .

The reduction from 3-Partite Set Cover to Min-DNF(*) is given in the following lemma.

     LEMMA 3.2. There is an algorithm that takes as input an instance n k  ¡ of 3-
Partite Set Cover and outputs an instance of Min-DNF(*). The instance of Min-DNF(*)
defines a partial function f on O log n¡ variables, such that the size of the smallest DNF
consistent with f is equal to the size of the smallest cover for the input 3-Partite Set Cover
instance. The algorithm runs in time polynomial in n.

     Proof. Given an input instance n k  ¡ of 3-Partite Set Cover, the algorithm pro-
duces an indexed set of vectors V ¢  vi : i   n  and W ¢  wA : A   all of the same
6                         MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

(small) length t satisfying the condition (*) of Lemma 3.1. We will specify V and then define
W according to the rule that for A  , wA is the bitwise OR of  vi : i  A . This guarantees

the forward implication of condition (*) for any choice of V ; it is the backward implication

that requires some care in choosing V .

   ¡ ¢¤£ Let q be the smallest integer such thatq n. Thus q ¢ O logn¡ . Assign to each
                                           q2

i   n a unique q-bit Boolean vector b i¡ containing exactly q 2 1's. For i   n , write  i¡

for the index of the block of  that contains i. Let t ¢ 3q. We will consider the t-bit vectors
in V and W as being divided into 3 blocks of size q. For i   n , let vi be equal to 0 on all

blocks but block  i¡ ; on block  i¡ it is b i¡ . To see that the backward implication of  ¡
holds, let A  and i   n and assume that vi  wA. Then A contains one element i with

 i ¡ ¢  i¡ and so we must have b i¡  b i ¡ , which implies i ¢ i .
     V and W can be generated in time nO 1¡ . The partial function f will have domain  0 1 t.

The lemma then follows immediately from Lemma 3.1.

     3.2. Reducing Min-DNF(*) to Min-DNF. As mentioned above, the second phase of our
reduction is taken from Gimpel. We describe the phase here, and will build on it later in order
to prove inapproximability results. The second phase of Gimpel's reduction maps a partial
function f to a total function g. The variables underlying g are V (the variables of f ) plus two
additional variables, y1 and y2. The total function g is defined as follows:

   g £x¢ y1y2 ¡ ¢  ¦¥     1  if f ¤x¢ ¡ ¢  1 and y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1           ¢ p¤x¢ ¡
                   § ¨¦¦  1  if f ¤x¢ ¡ ¢   and y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1
                          1  if f ¤x¢ ¡ ¢   , y1 ¢ p ¤x¢ ¡ , and y2 ¢

                          0 otherwise

     where p¤x¢ ¡ ¢ 0 if the parity of x¢ is even, and p¤x¢ ¡ ¢ 1 if the parity of x¢ is odd. Let
s ¢ ¦ f  1  ¡ ¦ . The following lemma is implicit in Gimpel's reduction (cf. [15]).

   © LEMMA 3.3. dnf-size g¡ ¢ dnf-size f ¡ s.

   Proof. The idea behind the proof is as follows. The key observation is that every DNF

for g requires s distinct terms to cover the inputs of the third type in the definition of g above;

these terms can simultaneously cover all inputs of the second type, but not those of the first

type. The remaining terms of the DNF must therefore cover the terms of the first type; and

may optionally cover the terms of the second type; they thus constitute a solution to the

© Min-DNF(*) problem for f . It follows that dnf-size g¡ ¢ dnf-size f ¡ s. We now prove this

formally.

   © We first show that dnf-size g¡  dnf-size f ¡ s. Suppose  is a minimum-size DNF
consistent with f . Define a DNF  with terms of two types: first, for every input x¢  f  1  ¡ ,

¡ ¡ ¢          contains the term

second and third types
   i:xi 1 xi                 i:xi 0       xi y2 p x¡ .   These terms cover all   inputs of  the
                                         g. Second, for  every term T of ,       contains   the
   in the definition of

  term T y1 y2. These terms cover all inputs of the first type in the definition of g.
     Finally, suppose that x¢ y1y2 satisfies . Then one of the following three conditions holds:

¢ (1) x¢  f  1  ¡ , y1 ¢ p ¤x¢ ¡ , and y2 ¢ p£x¢ ¡ , (2) x¢  f  1  ¡ , and y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1, (3) x¢ satisfies 

 (and thus x¢  f  1 1¡ f  1  ¡ ) and y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1. In all three cases we have g£x¢ y1y2¡ ¢ 1, and
© © thus  is consistent with g. The number of terms in  is ¦ f  1  ¡ ¦ ¦  ¦ ¢ dnf-size f ¡ s.

   £ We now show that dnf-size g¡ dnf-size f ¡© s. Suppose that  is a smallest DNF
for g. We assume without loss of generality that each term of  is a prime implicant of g.

 ! We begin by proving that, for every x¢  f  1  ¡ ,  contains the term t £x¢ ¡ y2 p x¡ , where
                              MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7

  ¡     ¡ ¢  t £x¢ ¡ ¢
    i:xi 1 xi                 i:xi 0 xi . The proof is as follows. Let x¢  f  1  ¡ , and suppose
that the parity of x¢ is odd: the case of even parity is symmetric. Let T be a term of  that is

satisfied by x¢ 10 (where 1 and 0 are the values of y1 and y2 respectively). If, for some index
i, T does not contain the variable xi, let x¢  be obtained by flipping the i-th bit of x¢ . Then x¢  10
falsifies g (since x¢  has even parity), but satisfies T , contradicting the assumption that  is

consistent with g. Thus T contains each of the variables x1 ¤ ¨ ¨! xn. In addition, T contains

the variable y1, as otherwise x¢ 00 would satisfy T . Finally, since T is a prime implicant of g,

we have that T ¢ t ¤x¢ ¡ y1.

    We now prove that there exists a subformula ^ of  and a DNF   over the x¢ variables
¥   ¢ that is consistent with f , such that ^ ¢
                              ¡¢        y1             y2 . Let ^ be the subformula of

                                T T

 consisting of those terms that are satisfied by x¢ 11 for some x¢  f  1 1¡ . Each term of

 ^ contains y1 y2, since flipping y1 or y2 produces an input that falsifies g. It follows that
¥   ^ ¢                y2¡ where   is a DNF. It remains to show that   is consistent with f .
    ¢¡     y1

      T T

For every x¢  f  1 1¡ , there is a term of  satisfied by x¢ 11, and thus there is a corresponding

term of   satisfied by x¢ . On the other hand, every x¢  f  1 0¡ must falsify   , as otherwise

x¢ 11 would satisfy .

    ! It follows from the above that  consists of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f  1  ¡ ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         consis-
together with the subformula ^ . These components
                                        terms t £x¢ ¡  yd2isjpoixn¡ tf.oSrienaccehx¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                        are pairwise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     is
© tent with f , ^ contains at least dnf-size f ¡ terms, and thus the size of  is at least dnf-size f ¡

s.

     It follows that there is a polynomial-time reduction from Min-DNF(*) to Min-DNF. Com-
bining this with the previous reduction from 3-Partite Set Cover to Min-DNF(*), it follows
that Min-DNF is NP-complete.

     4. On the Approximability of Min-DNF. Although the two-phase reduction above
proves the NP-completeness of Min-DNF, it does not give us inapproximability results. There
are two problems. First, the reduction begins with an instance of 3-Partite Set Cover, a prob-
lem that can be approximated in polynomial time to within a factor of ln 3 [22, 29] (since the
size of the largest subset is 3); to obtain inapproximability results we need to reduce from
a problem that is difficult to approximate. Also, the second phase of the reduction, from
Min-DNF(*) to Min-DNF, is not approximation preserving.

     We replace the first phase of the reduction with a reduction that exploits properties of the
Set Cover instance obtained by the PCP-based inapproximability results of Lund/Yannakakis
and Feige [30, 17]. We then modify the second phase to make it approximation preserving.
The final two-phase reduction gives an inapproximability factor of ¤ log N ¡  ¡ assuming that
NP is not contained in quasipolynomial time.

     In Appendix A we also present a modified version of the first phase of the reduction,
which reduces from r-Uniform Set Cover rather than from 3-Partite Set Cover. This allows
us to obtain an inapproximability result for Min-DNF by applying known inapproximability
results for r-Uniform Set Cover. However, the result we obtain for Min-DNF is weak (inap-
proximability to within a factor of  loglogN¡ ). Nevertheless, the reduction itself may be
of independent interest, since it requires a different technique to reduce from r-Uniform Set
Cover rather than from r-Partite Set Cover.

    4.1. New reduction to Min-DNF(*). In this section we present a reduction that follows

the PCP-based inapproximability results for Set Cover [30, 17]. We will closely follow the

Lund/Yannakakis reduction, as presented by Khot [26].

                                                       G L1  L2  ¡ where G ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       V W  E ¡ is
    ¥ An instance of Label Cover is denoted by¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                £
a regular bipartite graph, L1 and L2 are sets of labels, and  ¢  vw  v w¡ E denotes the¤
8                                   MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

constraints on each edge. For every edge v w¡  E we have a map vw : L1  L2. A labelling
l : V  L1, W  L2 satisfies the constraint on an edge v w¡ if vw l v¡¨¡ ¢ l w¡ . Given an

instance , the output should be a labelling that satisfies the maximum fraction, OPT ¡ ,£                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        £

of edge constraints.

   THEOREM 4.1. [30, 26] There is a constant c ¡ 1 such that it is NP-hard to solve the fol-
¥ lowing gap version of Label Cover. The input is an instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¢  G¢       V  W  E ¡ ¤  7 ¤  2 §  vw  v w¡ E ¡

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¤

of Label Cover. The instance should be accepted if OPT ¡ ¢ 1, and the instance should be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        £

rejected if OPT ¡ is at most c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £

   Note that the reduction is from Max3SAT(5)(the problem of maximizing the number

of satisfied clauses in a 3CNF formula where each variable occurs in exactly five clauses).

The vertices in V correspond to the m clauses, and the vertices in W correspond to the n

variables. Using Raz's parallel repetition theorem [36], we can amplify the gap, obtaining, for
¥ any positive integer k, an instance  ¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G ¢   V   W   E  ¡ !  7k ¤ 2k  ¨  v w  v w ¡ E ¡ , where

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¢  ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¤

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢       ¢  ¢

¦ V  ¦ ¢ ¦ V ¦ k and ¦ W  ¦ ¢ ¦ W ¦ k, such that OPT ¡ ¢ 1 implies OPT  ¡ ¢ 1, and OPT ¡  c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £                  £                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              £

implies OPT  ¡  2 k, where  £ 0 is an absolute constant. Note that the sizes of both V 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   £

and W  are nO k¡ , where n is the number of variables in the Max3SAT(5) instance.

   DEFINITION 4.2. A partition system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             m h t ¡ consists of t partitions A1  A1¡ ¤ ¨¤ ! At  At ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¢

of  m , with the property that no collection of h sets, with at most one set from each partition,

covers all of  m .

     LEMMA 4.3. [30] For every h and t, there is an efficiently constructible partition system
    m h t ¡ with m ¢ O 2hh logt ¡ .

¢

     We now review the reduction from the Label Cover instance  to a Set Cover instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £

    ¢ ¡ . First, the universe ¢ is as follows. Let t ¢ 2k, let h be a parameter to be determined
later, and let m ¢ m t  h¡ ¢ O 2hh logt ¡ be the parameter specified by Lemma 4.3. For each
edge e  E  we associate a subuniverse ¢ e ¢  e i¡ ¦ i    m  . The entire universe ¢ is the
disjoint union of these ¦ E  ¦ subuniverses. Associated with each edge e is a partition system

¢ m h t ¡ over ¢ e, with one partition associated with each of the possible labels in L2. Thus
each label b   t corresponds to a partition Abe  Abe ¡ of ¢ e. The size of the entire universe
is nO k¡ 2O h¡ . The set system is the union of two collections of sets: S v a¡ , for each
vertex v  V  and each label a   7k ; and S w b¡ , for each w  W  and each label b   2k . In

particular,

      S v a¡ ¢           £     ¥ A v w¡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vw a¡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S w b¡ ¢           £  ¥ A v w¡b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¤
                      w: v w¡ E¤ ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v: v w¡ E¤ ¢

The following lemma is implicit in [30, 26].

   © LEMMA 4.4. [30, 26] If OPT  ¡ ¢ 1 then ¡ £ ¢ ¡ has a cover of size ¦ V  ¦ ¦ W  ¦ . If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  £

© OPT  ¡  1 2h2¡ then every cover of ¡ £¢ ¡ has size at least h ¦ V  ¦ ¦ W  ¦ ¡  16.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  £

   ¡ ¡ Choosing h  2k 2 1 2, we obtain a gap of h 16 for the Set Cover instance from the 2k

gap of the Label Cover instance. For k ¢ O loglog n¡ sufficiently large, we have ¦ ¢ ¦ ¢ 2O h¡ ,

and thus the gap is  log ¦ ¢ ¦ ¡ . The size of the Set Cover instance is quasipolynomial in

n. Thus a polynomial-time, h 16¡ -approximation algorithm for Set Cover could distinguish

between the cases OPT  ¡ ¢ 1 and OPT  ¡  2 k in time 2polylog n¡ , implying that NP£                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           £

is contained in DT IME 2polylog n¡ ¡ .

   We now show how to reduce instances of Set Cover of the above form to Min-DNF(*)

instances. By the observations in Section 3.1 it suffices to define three sets of vectors,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9

 ue i ¦ e i¡  ¢                                                                                                                                                                                              ,  tv a ¦ v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        V  a            L1  , and  tw b ¦ w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W  b            L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   such that the following
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¤
       ¤

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¤

conditions hold: (1) ue i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tv a iff e i¡  S v a¡ , for all e i¡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¢   , v  V and a  L1; and (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¤

ue i  tw b iff e i¡  S w b¡ , for all e i¡  ¢ , w  W , and b  L2, Let r  O log ¦ V  ¦ ¡ be such
¡ ¢ £   that¤

              ¤

             r        max ¦ V  ¦  ¦ W  ¦ ¡ . Our function will have variables  x1 ¨ ¨¤¤ xr   x1 ¤ ¨ ¨!  xr 
            r2
 © ©  ya ¦ a  L1   yb ¦ b  L2  . Thus the number of variables is O log ¦ V  ¦ ¨¦ L1 ¦ ¦ L2 ¦ ¡ ¢
© O k logn 7k¡ .

          We assign to each v  V  a unique set Sv ¥  1¨¤¨¤  r  of size r 2; and similarly each

w  W  is assigned a unique set Sw ¥  1¨ ¤¨ ¨ r of size r 2. For each v  V  and a  L1,

we define a Boolean vector tv a as follows. The vector tv a has zeroes corresponding to those                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¤

variables xi such that i  Sv; and it has a zero corresponding to ya. The remaining bits of

tv a are ones. We similarly define, for each w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W  and b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L2, a Boolean vector tw b having
                                                                                                                                                                                   ¤

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¤

zeroes corresponding to those variables xi such that i  Sw, and a zero corresponding to yb ,

and whose remaining bits are ones.

          We now describe, for each e i¡  ¢ , a Boolean vector ue i. Suppose that e ¢ v w¡ ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¤

and let S v a1¡ ¤¨ ¤¤  S v ak¡ and S w b1¡ ¨¤ ¨!  S w b§¡ be all of the sets in containing e i¡ .

Then ue i has zeroes in the positions corresponding to the following variables: (1) Variables
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¤

xi, where i  Sv, (2) Variables xi , where i  Sw, (3) Variables yai, where 1  i  k, and (4)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¡

Variables yb i, where 1  i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             . The remaining bits of ue i are ones.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¤

          LEMMA 4.5. For all e i¡  ¢ , v  V , w  W , a  L1, and b  L2, the following condi-

tions hold: ue i                                                                                                                                                                                            tv a iff e i¡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S v a¡ and ue i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tw b iff e i¡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S w b¡ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¤
                      ¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¤

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¤

          Proof. Suppose first that e i¡  S v a¡ , where v  V  and a  L1. Then e ¢ v w¡ for

some vertex w                                                                                                                                                                                               W       .  The  zeroes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of  tv a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       are     in    positions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           corresponding                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to  variables  xi,   where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¤

i  Sv, and in the position corresponding to ya. Since e ¢ v w¡ , the vector ue i has zeroes in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¤

the positions corresponding to variables xi, where i  Sv, and since e i¡  S v a¡ the vector

ue i also has a zero in the position corresponding to ya. Thus ue i ¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¤  tv a. The case where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¤

e i¡  S w b¡ , where w  W  and b  L2, is symmetric.

          Now suppose that e i¡ © S v a¡ , where v  V  and a  L1. Suppose that e ¢ v  w ¡ . If

v ¢©      v then there exists an index j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sv      ;     and     ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i  has                                                                                                                                                                                   a  one      in  the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  position   corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¤

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢

to     xj,  while     tv a                                                                                                                                                                                  has     a  zero                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in     the  same                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           position,             and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         thus                                                                                                                                                                                     ue i  ©     tv a. So assume that v ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¤

By definition of tv a, we know that tv a has a zero in the position corresponding to ya. But                                                                                                                ¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¤

since e ¢ v w ¡ , ue i has a zero in this position iff e i¡  S v a¡ ; and as we have supposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¤

that e i¡ © S v a¡ it follows that the position in ue i corresponding to ya is set to one. Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¤

ue i ©      tv a. The case where e i¡ ©                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S w b¡ , where w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W  and b                                                                                                                                                                                              L2, is symmetric.
                                                                                                                                                                                              ¤
    ¤

          By     the  results                                                                                                                                                                                    of    Section                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3.1,     the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vectors       ue i,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tv a,                                                                                                                                                                                 and      tw b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yield  an     instance  of  Min-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¤
                ©¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¤

DNF(*) on O k logn 7k¡ variables whose optimum is equal to the optimum for the instance

           ¢ ¡ of Set Cover.

     THEOREM 4.6. If NP ¥© DTIME 2polylog n¡ ¡ then there exists an absolute constant  £ 0
such that no polynomial time algorithm achieves an approximation ratio better than logN ¡ 
for Min-DNF(*), where N is the size of the input truth table.

          Proof. Let f be the partial function specified by our reduction. Claims 4.4 and 4.5,

together with the results of Section 3.1, imply that our Min-DNF(*) instance has the following
© properties: if OPT  ¡ ¢ 1, then dnf-size f ¡  ¦ V  ¦ ¦ W ¤¦ ; and if OPT  ¡  2 k, then
£ © ¡ dnf-size f ¡ h ¦ V ¤ ¦ ¦ W  ¦ ¡  16, where h ¢  2k 2¡ . Let us take k ¢ log log n, and thus                                                                                                                £                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              £

¡ h ¢ ¤ log n¡  2¡ . Let N be the size of the truth table for f . The number of variables of f is
© ¡ log N ¢ O k log n 7k¡ ¢ O¤ log n¡ log7¡ , and thus the gap is h 16 ¢ ¤ log N ¡  2log7¡ ¡ . The
10                                           MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

truth table has size 2polylogn, and can be generated in time polynomial in its size. The theorem
follows by taking  ¢   2 log7¡ .

     4.2. Approximation-preserving reduction from Min-DNF(*) to Min-DNF. We mod-

ify the reduction from Section 3.2 to make it approximation preserving. Let f be a partial

© © © Boolean function over variables x1 ¨ ¤¨!  xn. Let s ¢ ¦ f  1  ¡ ¦ . We construct a new total func-

tion g such that dnf-size g ¡ ¢ s dnf-size f ¡ s ¢ s dnf-size f ¡ 1¡ . Let t ¢ n 1, and let
S ¥  0 1 t be a collection of s vectors, each containing an odd number of 1's. We add t new

variables z1 ¤ ¨¨ ¤  zt , and define  ¦¥¦
                                      § ¦¨¦
                g £x¢ y1y2 ¢z¡ ¢             1  if f £x¢ ¡ ¢  1, y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1, and ¢z  S
                                             1  if f £x¢ ¡ ¢   and y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1
                                             1  if f £x¢ ¡ ¢
                                                              ¢  , y1 ¢ p ¤x¢ ¡ , and y2 ¢ p ¤x¢ ¡
                                             0 otherwise

     © LEMMA 4.7. dnf-size g ¡ ¢ s dnf-size f ¡ s

      ¡    ¡ ¢  Proof. For binary vector w¢ , we use t w¢ ¡ to denote the term i:wi 1 wi
                                                                                                    i:wi 0 wi .
     © We first show that dnf-size g ¡  s dnf-size f ¡ s. Suppose that  is a smallest DNF

consistent with f . Define a DNF  with terms of the following two types. First, for every

 ! input x¢    1  ¡

second        third
         f           ,  contains the term t £x¢ ¡  .            y2 p x¡  . These terms cover        all inputs  of the
         and         types in the definition of g             Second,    for every term T of        and every   vector

   ¢z  S,  contains the term T y1 y2 t ¢z¡ . These terms cover all inputs of the first type

in the definition of g . Finally, suppose that x¢ y1y2¢z satisfies . Then one of the following

¢ conditions holds: (1) x¢  f  1  ¡ , y1 ¢ p£x¢ ¡ , and y2 ¢ p ¤x¢ ¡ , (2) x¢  f  1  ¡ , and y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1,

 (3) x¢ satisfies  (and thus x¢  f  1 1¡ f  1  ¡ ), y1 ¢ y2 ¢ 1, and ¢z  S. In all three cases
© © we have g ¤x¢ y1y2¢z¡ ¢ 1, and thus  is consistent with g . The number of terms in  is

¦ f  1  ¡ ¦ ¦  ¡¦ ¦ S ¦ ¢ s dnf-size f ¡ s.

   £ © We next show that dnf-size g ¡ s dnf-size f ¡ s. Suppose that  is a smallest DNF for

g . The same reasoning used in the proof of Lemma 3.3 shows that, for every x¢  f  1  ¡ , 

  contains the term t £x¢ ¡ y2 p x¡ . We now argue that for each ¢z  S, there exists a subformula
   ¥  z of , and a DNF z over the x¢ variables and consistent with f , such that z ¢
                                                                                                    ¡

                                                                                                      T T ¢z¢

  ¢  y1 y2 t ¢z¡ . Let ¢z  S, and let z be the subformula of  consisting of those terms that
   are satisfied by x¢ 11¢z for some x¢  f  1 1¡ . Each term of z contains y1 y2 t ¢z¡ , since
 ¥    ¢   flipping either y1 or y2, or any bit of ¢z, produces an input that falsifies g . It follows that
z ¢  ¡               y1  y2  t ¢z¡           where z is a DNF. It remains to show that z is consistent

       T T ¢z¢

with f . For every x¢  f  1 1¡ , there is a term of  that is satisfied by x¢ 11¢z, and thus there is

 a corresponding term of z that is satisfied by x¢ . On the other hand, every x¢  f  1 0¡ must
 falsify z , as otherwise x¢ 11¢z would satisfy .
                                                                                                     f  1  ¡ ;
                                                                                                    Since z
    and
     It  follows from the  above that  consists of the terms t £x¢ ¡       y2 p x¡ for each x¢ 
     of  the subformulae   z, for each z¢  S. These components           are pairwise disjoint.

 is consistent with f it follows that z contains at least dnf-size f ¡ terms, and thus the size of
©  is at least s dnf-size f ¡ s.

     The results of Section 4.2, together with Theorem 4.6, yield the following hardness result
for Min-DNF.

     THEOREM 4.8. If NP ¥© DTIME 2polylog n¡ ¡ then there exists a constant  £ 0 such that
MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11

no polynomial time algorithm achieves an approximation ratio better than log N¡  for Min-
DNF, where N is the size of the truth table.

     4.3. An improved hardness result under additional assumptions. In this section, we
prove an  ¥ logN ¡ hardness of approximation result for Min-DNF under the additional
assumption that a restriction of Set Cover is  log n¡ -hard to approximate.

     DEFINITION 4.9. The f -Frequency Bounded Set Cover problem is the restriction of Set
Cover to instances where each element occurs in at most f n¡ sets, where n is the total size
of the instance.

     It is well-known ([21]) that a factor f approximation for f -Frequency Bounded Set Cover

can be obtained in polynomial time. Thus for f ¢ o logn¡ , f -Frequency Bounded Set Cover

is not as hard to approximate as the general Set Cover problem. On the other hand, the
reduction of Lund and Yannakakis showing an  logn¡ hardness of approximation for Set
Cover produces an instance of ¨ logn¡ c¡ -Frequency-Bounded-Set-Cover, for some con-
stant c, which implies an  log n¡ hardness result for that problem. We conjecture that f -
Frequency-Bounded-Set-Cover is NP-hard to approximate within a factor better than c2 ln n,
for f ¢ c1 ln n and some constants c1  c2. Resolving this conjecture is an interesting ques-
tion in its own right, since it postulates a frequency threshold (within a constant factor) for

hardness. Assuming that the conjecture holds, we can prove an §¥ logN¡ hardness of ap-

proximation result for Min-DNF using a simple, randomized reduction.

     THEOREM 4.10. If there exist constants c1 and c2 such that it is NP-hard to approximate
 c1 ln n¡ -Frequency Bounded Set Cover to within c2 ln n, then there exists a constant c3 such
that no polynomial-time algorithm for Min-DNF achieves an approximation ratio better than
c3 ¥ log N unless NP ¥ DTIME 2polylog n¡ ¡ .

     Proof. Assume that there exist constants c1 and c2 as in the lemma. We prove an
 ¥ logN ¡ hardness of approximation for Min-DNF(*); the reduction from section 4.2 ex-
tends the same result to Min-DNF. Let  ¢ ¡ be an instance of c1 ln n¡ -Frequency Bounded
Set Cover of size n. The idea of the reduction is as follows. First, we will map each set

S  to a subset f S¡ ¥  b , for a suitably chosen parameter b. Second, we define vectors
wS   0 1 b for each S  , by letting wS have zeroes in those positions contained in f S¡
and ones elsewhere. Finally, we define vectors ux   0 1 b for each x  ¢ having zeroes in

the positions contained in Fx, where

¥ ¥ Fx ¢£ f S¡

S :x S

and ones elsewhere. If the vectors satisfy the condition ux   wS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "  x  S for all x  ¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ¡

and S  , then by Lemma 3.1 we can construct an instance of Min-DNF(*) over b variables
whose optimum is equal to the optimum for ¢ ¡ . Notice that the definition of ux implies

that the "if" part of the condition is always satisfied. For the "only if" part to hold, it is

necessary and sufficient that for every S such that x © S, ux has a one in a position where
wS has a zero; that is, f S¡ ¥© Fx. For S  , let f S¡ be defined by choosing each i   b

independently with probability p. Fix an element x  ¢ , and a set S  such that x © S. We

will show that the probability that f S¡ ¥ Fx is small. For any choice of p, the probability that

f S¡ ¥ Fx is maximized when x occurs in exactly c1 lnn sets (since it cannot occur in more

than c1 lnn sets). As we wish to find an upper bound for the probability that f S¡ ¥ Fx, we

may therefore assume that x occurs in exactly c1 ln n sets. For 1  i  b, let Xi be the indicator
variable for the event i  Fx. Then E  Xi ¢ 1  1  p¡ c1 lnn, and letting X ¢ 1 i b Xi be the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¢  ¢
12                               MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

size of Fx, linearity of expectation implies

                                       E  X  ¢ b 1  1  p¡ c1 ln n¡
                                                 b 1  e pc1 lnn ¡

© ¡ ¢ which can be made smaller than b 4 by choosing p ln 4 3¡  c1 ln n¡ . The Xi's are in-

dependent, and we apply the simplified Chernoff bound Pr X £ 1  ¡ E X   ¡ 2  E X to
obtain

                            ¡ Pr  X £ b 2 ¡ 2 b 4

Let us consider the case ¦ Fx ¦  b 2. Then the probability that f S j ¡ ¥ Fx is

           £ ¤ ¥ ¡ Pr f S j ¡ ¥ Fx ¦ Fx ¦  b 2  1  p¡ b 2
                   ¤¤ §¦ ¡ 1  ln 4 3¡ b 2
                              ¨ c1 lnn

                                       ¡ ¡ ¡ e b ln 4 3¡ 2c1 ln n¡

Choosing b ¢ 8c1 ln2 n, we have

                              ¡ © ¡ Pr  f S j ¡ ¥ Fx  2 b 4 e 4ln 4 3¡ lnn

                                 e ¡   3 lnn

                                 ¢ 1 n3

Applying the union bound, the probability that there exists an element x  ¢ and a set S 
with x © S, such that f S¡ ¥ Fx, is at most 1 n. Thus with probability at least 1  1 n, we
can apply the construction of Lemma 3.1 to the vectors ux and wS, to obtain an instance of
Min-DNF(*) over b ¢ O log2 n¡ variables whose minimum DNF has the same size as the
minimum set cover for  ¢ ¡ . The Min-DNF(*) instance has size N ¢ 2b ¢ O nlog2 n¡ ,

and the probabilistic construction can be derandomized in quasi-polynomial time using the

method of conditional probabilities (see, e.g., [6]). It follows that there is no polynomial-

time algorithm for Min-DNF(*) which achieves an approximation ratio better than c2 lnn ¢
 ¥ log N ¡ unless NP ¥ DTIME 2polylog n¡ ¡ .

     5. A tight example for the greedy algorithm. We show that there exist instances of
Min-DNF for which the greedy Set Cover algorithm achieves an  logN¡ approximation
ratio. Our approach is to take a standard worst-case Set Cover instance and to apply a version
of the reductions of Sections 3.1 and 4.2 to obtain first a Min-DNF(*) instance, and then a
Min-DNF instance. We then show that the greedy algorithm operates on the resulting Min-
DNF(*) instance, and on the resulting Min-DNF instance, much as it does on the original Set
Cover instance.

    5.1. Tight example for greedy on Min-DNF(*). The starting point is the following

Set Cover instance, on which the greedy Set Cover algorithm has worst-case behavior. The

instance consists   of m      1 pairwise-disjoint sets    S1  ¨c¤o¨ !n tSamin s1h, aslufcohf  that  ¦ Si ¦ ¢ 2i;  and of two
additional sets T0  and       . For each set Si, the set  T0                                  the   elements      in Si, while
                          T1

T1 contains the other half. On this set collection, the greedy algorithm chooses the cover

consisting of all the sets Si, while the optimal solution consists only of T0 and T1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13

     Let ¢ be the underlying universe. We define three sets of vectors,  ve ¦ e  ¢  ,  si ¦ 1 

i  m  1 , and  t0  t1  , over  0 1 2 m 1¡ , such that the following three conditions hold for all

e  ¢ and all 1  i  m  1: (1) ve  si iff e  Si; (2) ve  t0 iff e  T0; and (3) ve  t1 iff e 
T1. The vectors  ve ¦ e  ¢  are defined according to the set in which they occur, as follows:
each element e  Si is assigned a unique vector ve from the set  x10m ix01m i ¦ x   0 1 i  .
The vectors  si ¦ 1  i  m  1 and  t0  t1  are defined as follows: si ¢ 1i10m i1i01m i;

t0 ¢ 01m1m 1, and t1 ¢ 1m 101m. The set T0 is defined as  e  ¢ ¦ ve  t0  , and the set T1
is defined as  e  ¢ ¦ ve  t1  . It is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       eea1lesamilryeenpvteasrirfifiwroeimdsetehdaaicsthjothoineftts,heSetissheSat1ss¨ Ss¤i¨1z! ¤e ¨S2¨m¤i,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1  T0  T1 have the
required structure: namely, S1 ¨¤ ¨ !  Sm
disjoint, each consisting of half of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and T0 and T1 are

(2) and (3) hold by definition, as does the "if" direction of condition (1).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SFmor   1. Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the "only if"
© © © © direction of (1), note that if e  S j for j ¢© i, then either bit j 1 or bit m 1¡ i 1¡

witnesses the fact that ve © si.

     The partial Boolean function f is defined as in the reduction from Section 3.1: the ones
of f are the vectors ve, for each u  ¢ ; the stars of f are those remaining inputs x¢ such that
x¢  si for some 1  i  m  1, or x¢  t0, or x¢  t1; and the remaining inputs are zeroes. The

following general lemma shows that the prime implicants of f , viewed as sets and considering

only the ones of f that they cover, have exactly the same structure as the original set system.

     LEMMA 5.1. Let be a set system over universe ¢ such that no set in contains
another set in . Let  ve ¦ e  ¢  and  wS ¦ S   be sets of Boolean vectors such that
the following condition holds for all e  ¢ and all S  : ve  wS if and only if e  S. Let

f be the function obtained from as in Lemma 3.1 using the given vectors. Then the set of
prime implicants of f is exactly   wS ¡ ¦ S   .

     Proof. We first show that each term  wS ¡ is, indeed, a prime implicant of f . Suppose,

on the contrary, that there is an implicant  of f that subsumes  wS ¡ , for some S  . Note

that all variables in  are negated. Let u¢ be a maximal truth assignment satisfying . Since

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¢
¢ f u¢ ¡ ¢ 1, there is a set S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 for  each                   i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0 then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               such that u¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is,             index  i,  if                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ¢

ui ¢ 0. By our choice of u¢ we have that ui ¢ 0 iff the literal xi occurs in , and by definition
¢ ¢ wS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           wS
  i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢
  ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 iff the literal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     xi  occurs in      i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¡  .  Thus for each index i,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        if the literal       xi occurs in

  w ¡S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          then it also occurs in . As both  and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w ¡S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   consist exclusively of negated literals,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¢

we have  ¢ "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¡  ;  and  since    subsumes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wS ¡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                wS ¡ ¢ "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¢"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       w ¡S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¢

For each e  U , e  S ¡ " ve  wS, and ve  wS iff ve satisfies  wS ¡ . Thus,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e S ¢ "        ve  wS ¢ "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¢"        e  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¢

That is, S ¥ S , contradicting the assumption about .

     We now show that every prime implicant of f is equal to  wS ¡ , for some S  . Let 
be a prime implicant of f , and let u¢ be a maximal truth assignment satisfying . Then there

¢ exists S  such that u¢  wS, and thus wiS ¢ 0 implies ui ¢ 0, and by the same argument

as before we have that each literal xi occurring in  wS ¡ also occurs in . It follows that
 ¢  wS ¡ .

     Lemma 5.1 implies that the prime implicants of f , viewed as sets, have exactly the same
structure with respect to the ones of f as the original set collection has with respect to ¢ .
It follows that the greedy algorithm finds a solution of size m  1, consisting of the terms
14  MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

    s1 ¡ ¨ ¨   sm 1 ¡ , while the optimal solution,  t0¡  t1¡ , has size two. As the instance
© has n ¢ 2m 2 variables, the approximation ratio is m  1¡  2 ¢ n  4¡  4.

    5.2. Tight example for greedy on Min-DNF. We now extend the construction of the

previous section to give an instance of Min-DNF for which the greedy algorithm achieves an

approximation ratio of  n¡ ¢  logN ¡ . The instance is obtained by applying the reduction

of Section 4.2 to the function f from Section 5.1. As in the proof of Lemma 4.7, we use t w¢ ¡

¡ ¡ ¢      to denote the term i:wi 1 wi
    i:wi 0 wi .

     LEMMA 5.2. Let be a set of subsets of  n , and let f be a partial Boolean function,

such that and f satisfy the conditions of Lemma 3.1. Let g be the total Boolean function

obtained by applying the reduction from Section 4.2 to f . Then the prime implicants of g

   consist of exactly the following:  y1 y2 t ¢z¡ , where  is a prime implicant of f and z¢  S,
 ! and t £x¢ ¡ y2 p x¡ where f ¤x¢ ¡ ¢  .

     Proof. It is easy to verify that each term in the statement of the lemma is, indeed, a prime
implicant of g, noting that every prime implicant  of f must cover at least one vector in
f  1 1¡ , since each set in the original set system is non-empty.

     We now argue that all prime implicants of g are of the above types. Let  be an implicant
of g: we will show that  is subsumed by an implicant of one of the above two types. Let
x¢ y1y2¢z be an assignment that satisfies . We first consider the case where f £x¢ ¡ ¢ 1. From the
definition of g, it is clear that  contains t ¢z¡ , y1, and y2, as flipping the corresponding bits of
the assignment falsifies g. Moreover, the portion x of  containing x-variables is an implicant

   of f , and is therefore subsumed by a prime implicant   of f . Thus   y1 y2 t ¢z¡ is an

implicant of g, and subsumes . Now consider the case where f £x¢ ¡ ¢  , and assume without
loss of generality that x¢ has even parity. Then  must contain y2 and t £x¢ ¡ , as flipping any of

 these bits falsifies g, and thus  is subsumed by t £x¢ ¡ y2.

   ©The inputs to g are of the form x¢ y1y2¢z where the length of x¢ is n, and the length of ¢z is

t ¢ n 1. Each prime implicant of the second type in the statement of Lemma 5.2 covers
2t 1 ones of g and the ones covered by these prime implicants are pairwise disjoint. The
prime implicants of the first type each cover at most 2n 1 ¡ 2t 1 ones of g. Thus the greedy

algorithm begins by choosing all prime implicants of the second type. At this point, the

prime implicants of the first type corresponding to different values of z¢ cover disjoint subsets

of the ones of g, so let us only consider a particular value of ¢z: the choices made by the

greedy algorithm for other vectors ¢z are independent of its behaviour on this vector. Now the

   uncovered ones of g that are covered by a term  y1 y2 t ¢z¡ are precisely those whose x¢ -

component is a one of f , as the others are already covered by prime implicants of the second

type. Thus the prime implicants of this type chosen by the greedy algorithm are exactly

   the set of prime implicants of the form  y1 y2 t ¢z¡ , where  is a prime implicant that

would be chosen by the greedy algorithm on input f . It follows that the greedy solution has

© © size s m  1¡ s ¢ sm, while the optimal solution has size 2s s ¢ 3s. As the instance has
© © n ¢ 2m 4 t variables, the approximation ratio is m 3 ¢ n  t  4¡  6 ¢  n¡ .

     6. Fixed Parameter Complexity. It is known that the decision problem "Given a truth

table of a Boolean function f , and a number k, does f have a DNF with at most k terms?" can
be solved in time p N  2k2 ¡ , for some polynomial p, where N is the size of the truth table [20].

(This follows easily from the fact that if f is a Boolean formula that can be represented by
a k-term DNF formula, then there exist at most 2k prime implicants of f [12].) Thus, Min-

DNF is fixed parameter tractable [16]. Moreover, because the size of the input truth table
                             MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                                                             15

is N ¢ 2n, where n is the number of variables of f , it follows that Min-DNF is solvable in
polynomial time for any k ¢ O ¥ n¡ .

     It is an open question whether Min-DNF can be solved in polynomial time for k ¢ n.
But by applying a simple padding argument, we obtain the following corollary to the NP-
completeness result for Min-DNF:

     COROLLARY 6.1. If there exists some constant  £ 0 such that NP is not contained
in DTIME 2O n ¡ ¡ , then for some constant c £ 1, Min-DNF for k ¢ nc is not solvable in
polynomial time (where n is the number of input variables of the Boolean function defined by
the Min-DNF instance).

Proof. Because Min-DNF is NP-complete, there exists a polynomial-time reduction from

problems  in NP to Min-DNF. If the input to  is of size n, then the input to the resulting
Min-DNF problem will be a truth table of size s ¢ O nb¡ for some constant b £ 1, defining a

Boolean function on logs variables. The parameter k in the derived Min-DNF instance is no

more than s, since for any truth table, there is always a consistent DNF of size at most the size

of the truth table. Let c £  1. Let m ¢  s  1  .  Take  the   Min-DNF   instance        and      form  a  new  Min-
                                            c

DNF instance by padding the function in the truth table with m  logs new dummy variables.

Suppose Min-DNF is solvable in polynomial time when k ¢ nc, where n is the number of

input variables of the Boolean function defined by the Min-DNF instance. Then the padded

instance of Min-DNF can be solved in time polynomial in 2m, and  can be solved in time

         b                                              b  ,  this  is  less  than  2O  n  ¡  .  Contradiction.
                                                        
2O n c , where n is the size of input to . For c £

     7. Min-DNF and learning. One of the major problems in learning theory is to determine
whether DNF formulas can be learned in polynomial time. There are connections between
the complexity of Min-DNF and its fixed parameter versions, and the complexity of learning
DNF formulas. This connection is strongest for "proper" learning models. In such models,
any hypotheses used in the learning algorithm must be of the same type as the formulas being
learned by the algorithm. Thus if the task is to learn DNF formulas, hypotheses must be DNF
formulas. If the task is to learn k-term DNF formulas, then hypotheses must be k-term DNF
formulas.

     There has been a significant amount of research on learning k-term DNF formulas for
small values of k in both proper and improper models (see e.g. [8, 10, 28, 20, 35]). Pitt and
Valiant showed that in the PAC model, unless RP=NP you cannot learn k-term DNF formulas
in polynomial time using hypotheses that are k-term DNF formulas (for constant k) [35].
Their proof actually shows that the consistency problem for k-term DNF is hard. This problem
takes as input a partial Boolean function, specified by its 1's and 0's, and asks whether there
is a k-term DNF formula consistent with those entries. The work of Pitt and Valiant was
subsequently extended to obtain significantly stronger results on learning arbitrary length
DNF formulas in the PAC learning model [2, 18]. We note that our reduction to Min-DNF(*)
in fact implies that the consistency problem for k-term DNF is NP-hard for k ¢ n, even when
the underlying function depends on only logn of the n input variables (a log n "junta"); this
in turn implies that proper PAC learning of n-term DNF formulas depending on log n of the n
input variables is hard unless RP=NP.

     Pillaipakkamnatt and Raghavan [34] showed that for some  ¡ 1 and some c £ 1, logc n-
term DNF cannot be learned in the membership and proper equivalence query model unless
NP ¥ DT IME 2O n ¡ ¡ . Subsequently, Hellerstein and Raghavan proved that  log3  n¡ -
term DNF formulas cannot be learned in the same model; their proof involves a structural
property of DNF formulas and the result is without any assumptions [20]. (It can be improved
to  log2  ¡ .) It is open, however, whether logn-term DNF formulas can be learned in
16  MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

polynomial time in this model; ¥ logn-term DNF can be so learned [10].

     A polynomial-time algorithm for learning logn-term DNF formulas in the membership
and proper equivalence query model (i.e. with hypotheses that are log n-term DNF formulas)
would imply a polynomial-time algorithm for Min-DNF for k ¢ n [20]. The same proof shows
that for constant c, a polynomial-time algorithm for learning logc n-term DNF formulas would
imply a polynomial-time algorithm for Min-DNF for k ¢ nc. It follows that the result of [34]
mentioned above can also be derived from Corollary 6.1.

     The relation between truth table minimization and learning with membership and equiv-
alence queries relies on the following observation: Given a truth table representing a function
f , one can simulate a membership and equivalence query algorithm for learning (a hypothe-
sis representing) f by using the truth table to answer the queries. Feldman observed that one
can also use the truth table of f to generate uniformly distributed examples of f . Combining
this observation with the hardness of approximating Min-DNF he showed hardness of proper
PAC learning of min-DNF under the uniform distribution, with membership queries. More
specifically, he showed that for some  £ 0, unless P=NP, there is no polynomial-time algo-
rithm that PAC learns DNF formulas under the uniform distribution using hypotheses that are
DNF formulas of size at most n larger than the function being learned, even if membership
queries are allowed [18].

be  ap8p. roHxaimrdanteedsstoofwMitihni-nACa d0fa. cItnor[4o]fint 1w as  shown that neither Min-Circuit nor Min-NC1 can
                                                                         in polynomial time unless Blum Integers can be

factored efficiently. Here we strengthen that result to hold for Min-AC0 also. More precisely,

let Min-AC0d be the problem of estimating the size of the smallest depth-d AC0 circuit for a
function, given its truth table. In this section, we show that for large enough d, Min-AC0d
is hard to estimate, unless Blum integers can be factored in time 2n , where the value of d

depends on the value of  . We have not computed the relationship between d and  , but we

anticipate that this yields a meaningful inapproximability result for d as small as 10.

     LEMMA 8.1. For every language in NL, and for every , there exists a d such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £

there are ACd0 circuits of size 2n that recognize £ .

     Proof. Consider NL machines running in time m ¢ nc. To find an accepting path, guess
¥ m "checkpoints" and verify that, for every 2 adjacent "checkpoints" there is a path of

¡ length ¥ m connecting them. This can be implemented by a depth-three AC0 circuit of size

2O¡ mlogm¡ . If the number of checkpoints chosen is m1 3, then a similar strategy leads to a
depth-five circuit of size 2O m1¢ 3 logm¡ . That is, the top level of the depth-five circuit is an OR

¡ over all the 2O m1¢ 3 logm¡ sequences of checkpoints, of the AND that each of the m1 3  1 pairs
¡ of adjacent checkpoints is connected by a path of length m2 3. This latter condition can be
¡ checked by an OR over another 2O m1¢ 3 logm¡ sequences of m1 3 checkpoints, of an AND that
¡ ¡ each of the m1 3  1 pairs of adjacent checkpoints is connected by a path of length m1 3. Since
¡ ¡ the input head can only move a distance of m1 3 in m1 3 steps, and each checkpoint specifies
¡ ¡ the position of the input head, the condition that a given pair of checkpoints is connected by a

path of length m1 3 depends only on m1 3 input variables, namely those centered around the

¡ two input head positions specified by the checkpoints. Thus this condition can be expressed

by a CNF formula of size exponential in m1 3. (The depth can be optimized somewhat, using
closure under complement and merging adjacent layers ­ but we ignore such issues for now.)

     Iterating the above idea gives depth-d AC0 circuits of size 2n . This is basically a
strengthening of Nepomnjascii's Theorem [5, 33]. (The same claim, with an identical proof,
holds for any language accepted by a nondeterministic machine running in polynomial time
and using space no 1¡ . In particular, it holds for the complexity class LogCFL.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17

     DEFINITION 8.2. A 2n-bit integer is called a Blum Integer if N ¢ PQ, where P and Q
are two primes such that P Q 3 mod 4. The Blum Integer Factorization problem is as
follows. Given a Blum Integer N find the primes P and Q such that 1 ¡ P  Q and N ¢ PQ.

             THEOREM 8.3. For every  £ 0 and  £ 0 there is a depth d such that Blum Integer
Factorization is in BPTIME 2n ¡ ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¢     is any function that approximates Min-AC0d to

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         , where

within a factor of n1  (here n is the size of the truth-table input to Min-ACd0 ).

             Proof. We follow the proof given in [4]. In [32] a pseudo-random function ensemble

 fN r x¡ :  0 1 n   0 1  N r is constructed with the following two properties:¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¤

             © £ There is a TC0 circuit computing fN r x¡ , given a 2n bit integer N, a 4n2 2n-bit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¤
               string r, and an n-bit string x.

             £ For every probabilistic Turing machine running in time t n¡ with oracle access
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¤

             to fN r of query length n, there exists a probabilistic Turing machine ¥ running in¤

             time t n¡ nO 1¡ such that for every 2n-bit Blum integer N ¢ PQ, if ¦ Pr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¤   N fN r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¡¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¦

             1  Pr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rn N ¡ ¢ 1 ¦ £ 1 2, where Rn is a uniformly distributed random function
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¤

             ensemble, and the probability is taken over random r, and random bits of , then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¤

             Pr  N ¡ ¢ P Q¡  £ 1 2. In other words, if can distinguish the pseudorandom¥                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¤

             function ensemble from a truly random function "efficiently", then Blum Integers

             can be factored "efficiently" on a probabilistic machine.

             Our pseudrandom function ensemble                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fN r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is  computable  by  a  TC0     circuit     of  size  nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¢

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¤

some         constant  c . Let x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sxiz2e¨¤ a¨ p!  pxr2onxdimenaotetelyth2ens.triFnogrs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in    0 1   n in lexicographic order. Let
m be         a power   of two of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    all  large  enough n, all 2n-bit integers
© N and all 4n2 2n-bit strings r, consider the function hN r whose truth table is given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¤

¤fN r x1¡  fN r x2¡ ¤¨ ¤ ¤ fN r xm¡ . This function has TC0 circuits of size polynomial in n and¤                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¤

hence by Lemma 8.1, there is some d (depending only on ) such that this function has
depth-d AC0 circuits of size 2n for some  ¡ .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¢

             Now consider the following oracle Turing machine with access to oracle and to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¤

an oracle g: On input N,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 queries g on the lexicographically first m inputs, x1 ¤ ¨ ¤ ¤  xm, to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¤

get answers y1 ¤¨ ¨!  ym; let h denote the function whose truth table is given by y1 ¨¤ ¨¨ ym. ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         says that h has ACd0 circuits of size
                       ¡¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¢

then submits h to the approximation algorithm . If

less than m1                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          then M    will reject; otherwise M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               will accept.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¢     ap-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                We are assuming that

proximates Min-ACd0 within a factor of m1  , i.e., that 1  ¢ h¡  Min-ACd0 h¡  m1  . Now

for sufficiently large n, if the oracle g is chosen from the pseudorandom distribution  fN r  N r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¤      ¤

             will always reject, since as argued above, in this case h ¢ hN r has ACd0 circuits of
¡ then                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¤
size at most 2n , and 2n m1  ¡ m1  2. On the other hand, if g is taken uniformly at ran-

                   n, then y1 ¨¨ ym is a random string, and thus with extremely high probability
¡ dom from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              §
the function represented by y1 ¨ ¤  ym requires ACd0 circuits of size m log m £ m1  2 (since

most functions require circuits of this size), and this condition causes to accept. Hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¤

¦ Pr      ¤  N fN r x¡                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¡¢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1   Pr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¤     Rn N ¡ ¢ 1 ¦ £ 1 2, for sufficiently large n. Thus,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¤      can distin-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¦

guish the pseudorandom function ensemble from a truly random one with probability greater

than 1/2, and thus Blum Integers can be efficiently factored probabilistically.

     COROLLARY 8.4. For all  £ 0 and all  £ 0 there exists a d such that Min-ACd0
cannot be approximated to within a factor n1  in BPP unless Blum Integer Factorization is
in BPTIME 2n ¡ .
18  MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

     9. Discussion. There are close connections between the hardness of function minimiza-
tion problems and related learnability results. In addition to the connections discussed above
in Section 6, we mention two others: the complexity of Min-DNF(DNF) and approximating
Min-DNF(DNF) has been shown to be related to the problem of learning DNF with proper
membership and equivalence queries [11, 20, 1], and results on learning circuits [9] yield
positive results for approximating circuit minimization (cf. [42]). At a basic level, learning a
formula or circuit involves gathering information about it, and then synthesizing or compress-
ing that information to produce a compact hypothesis. The need for compactness provides
the connection to minimization. In many learning problems one can distinguish between in-
formational complexity (the number of queries or sample size needed), and computational
complexity (the amount of computation needed to process the information). Information
about a formula or circuit typically consists just of input/output pairs. Truth table minimiza-
tion problems are relevant to the computational hardness of learning; even if you have all
input/output pairs, the question is whether you can compact that information in polynomial
time.

     The NP-hardness of proper PAC learning DNF and of Min-DNF are known. On the
other hand, very strong inapproximability results are known for both proper PAC learning
and the function minimization problem for complexity classes starting at AC0. However,
these latter results rely on cryptographic assumptions, and are not known to hold under NP-
hardness assumptions. Thus an important open question is to resolve the NP-hardness of both
learnability results as well as function minimization results above for classes that are stronger
than DNF.

     Another open problem is to close the approximability gap for Min-DNF.

     10. Acknowledgements. The authors gratefully acknowledge Uri Feige and Subhash
Khot for helpful conversations on the inapproximability of partite restrictions of set cover.

                                                          REFERENCES

[1] A. Aizenstein, T. Hegedus, L. Hellerstein, and L. Pitt, "Complexity theoretic hardness results for
          query learning", Computational Complexity 7(1), 1998, pp. 19-53.

[2] M. Alekhnovich, M. Braverman, V. Feldman, A. Klivans, and T. Pitassi, "Automatizability and
          Learnability", in Proceedings of the 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Com-
          puter Science, Rome, Italy, 2004.

[3] E. Allender, L. Hellerstein, P. McCabe, T. Pitassi, and M. Saks, "Minimizing DNF Formulas and
          AC0 Circuits Given a Truth Table", ECCC TR05-126, 2005. Also appeared in Proceedings
          of the 21st Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity, 2006.

[4] E. Allender, M. Koucky, D. Ronneberger, and S. Roy, "Derandomization and distinguishing com-
          plexity", in Proceedings of the 18th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity,
          Aarhus, Denmark, 2003, pp. 209-220.

[5] E. Allender, M. Koucky, D. Ronneburger, and S. Roy, "Time-space tradeoffs in the counting hier-
          archy", in Proceedings of the 16th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity,
          Chicago, Illinois, USA, 2001, pp.295-302.

[6] N. Alon, J. Spencer, and P. Erdo¨s, The Probabilistic Method, John Wiley & Sons, 1992.
[7] N. Alon, D. Moshkovitz, and S. Safra, "Algorithmic Construction of Sets for k-Restrictions", to

          appear in ACM Transactions on Algorithms.
[8] U. Berggren, "Linear time deterministic learning of k-term DNF", in Proceedings of the 6th

          Annual ACM Conference on Computational Learning Theory, Santa Cruz, California, USA,
          1993, pp. 37-40.
[9] N. Bshouty, R. Cleve, R. Gavalda`, S. Kannan, and C. Tamon, "Oracles and Queries That Are
          Sufficient for Exact Learning", Journal of Computer and System Sciences 52(3), 1996, pp.
MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS  19

            421-433.
[10] N. H. Bshouty, "Simple learning algorithms using divide and conquer", Computational Complex-

            ity 6, 1997, pp. 174-194.
[11] N. H. Bshouty and L. Burroughs, "On the proper learning of axis parallel concepts", in Proceed-

            ings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory, Sydney, Australia,
            2002, pp. 287-302.
[12] A. Chandra and G. Markowsky, "On the number of prime implicants", Discrete Mathematics 24,
            1978, pp. 7-11.
[13] V. Chva´tal, "A greedy heuristic for the set covering problem", Mathematics of Operations Re-
            search 4, 1979, pp. 233-235.
[14] O. Coudert, "Two-level logic minimization: an overview", Integration, the VLSI Journal 17(2),
            1994, pp. 97-140.
[15] Sabastian Czort, The complexity of minimizing disjunctive normal form formulas, Master's The-
            sis, University of Aarhus, 1999.
[16] R. Downey and M. Fellows, Parameterized Complexity, Springer Verlag, 1999.
[17] U. Feige, "A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover", Journal of the ACM 45(4), 1998, pp.
            634-652.
[18] V. Feldman, "Hardness of Approximate Two-level Logic Minimization and PAC Learning with
            Membership Queries", ECCC TR05-127, 2005. Extended version to appear in Proceedings
            of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, 2006.
[19] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-
            Completeness. W. H. Freeman and Company, 1979.
[20] L. Hellerstein and V. Raghavan, "Exact learning of DNF formulas using DNF hypothesis", Jour-
            nal of Computer and System Sciences 70(4), 2005, pp. 435-470.
[21] D. S. Hochbaum. Approximation algorithms for the set covering and vertex cover problems.
            SIAM Journal on Computing, 11:555-556, 1982.
[22] D. S. Johnson, "Approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems", Journal of Computer
            and System Sciences 9, 1974, pp. 256-278.
[23] V. Kabanets, "Easiness assumptions and hardness tests: Trading time for zero error", Journal of
            Computer and System Sciences 63(2), 2001, pp. 236-252.
[24] V. Kabanets and J. L. Cai, "Circuit minimization problem", in Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
            ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, Portland, Oregon, USA, 2000, pp. 73-79.
[25] M. Kearns and L. Valiant, "Cryptographic limitations on learning boolean formula and finite
            automata", Journal of the ACM 41(1), 1989, pp. 433-444.
[26] S. Khot, Online lecture notes for Probabilistically Checkable Proofs and Hardness
            of Approximation, Lecture 3 (scribed by Deeparnab Chakrabarti), available at
           ¡¢¤£¦¢¥ ¥§©£ ¨  ¥¤ £¡"!"%# $ &!(')0¥ "' 1¡¥ (& 2 34©£ 576 .
[27] K. Kraj´icek and P. Pudla´k, "Some consequences of cryptographic conjectures for S21 and EF",
            In Logic and Computational Complexity: International Workshop, LCC '94, volume 960 of
            Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 210-220.
[28] E. Kushilevitz, "A simple algorithm for learning o8 log n9 -term DNF", Information Processing
            Letters 61(6), 1997, pp.289-292.
[29] L. Lova´sz, "On the ratio of optimal integral and fractional covers", Discrete Mathematics 13,
            1975, pp. 383-390.
[30] C. Lund and M. Yannakakis, "On the hardness of approximating minimization problems", Jour-
            nal of the ACM 41(5), 1994, pp. 960-981.
[31] W. J. Masek, "Some NP-complete set covering problems", Unpublished Manuscript, 1979.
[32] M. Naor and O. Reingold, "Number-theoretic constructions of efficient pseudorandom functions",
            In Proceedings of the 38th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
            Miami Beach, Florida, USA, 1997, pp. 458-467.
[33] V. A. Nepomnjascii, "Rudimentary predicates and Turing calculations" Math. Dokl 11, 1970, pp.
            1462-1465.
[34] K. Pillaipakkamnatt, and V. Raghavan, "On the Limits of Proper Learnability of Subclasses of
            DNF formulas", Machine Learning 25(2-3), 1996, pp. 237-263.
20                 MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS

[35] L. Pitt and L. G.Valiant, "Computational limitations on learning from examples", Journal of the
            ACM 35, 1988, pp. 965-984.

[36] R. Raz, "A Parallel Repetition Theorem", SIAM Journal on Computing 27, 1998, pp. 763-803.
[37] A. A. Razborov and S. Rudich, "Natural proofs", Journal of Computer and System Sciences

            55(1), August 1997, pp. 24-35.
[38] I. Dinur, E. Fischer, G. Kindler, R. Raz, S. Safra, PCP characterization of NP: Towards a Poly-

            nomially Small Error Probability, In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on
            Theory of Computing, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 1999, pp. 29-40.
[39] L. Trevisan, "Non-approximability results for optimization problems on bounded degree in-
            stances", In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
            Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 2001, pp. 453-461.
[40] Larry J. Stockmeyer, "The polynomial-time hierarchy", Theoretical Computer Science 3, 1977,
            pp. 1-22.
[41] C. Umans, "The minimum equivalent DNF problem and shortest implicants", In Proceedings of
            the 39th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Palo Alto, Califor-
            nia, USA, 1998, pp. 556-563.
[42] C. Umans, "Hardness of approximating 2p minimization problems", In Proceedings of the 40th
            Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, New York City, New York,
            USA, 1999, pp. 465-474.
[43] C. Umans, "Complexity of Two-Level Logic Minimization", Technical Report No. UCB/ERL
            M04/45, Berkeley, CA, October 2004.

Appendix

     Appendix A. Reduction from r-Uniform Set Cover.
     The following lemma describes a modified version of the reduction given in Section 3.1.
Whereas the reduction in that section is from 3-Partite Set Cover, the reduction here is from
r-Uniform Set Cover (all sets in the input set cover instance are of size r). Because the
reduction here is not from a partite version of Set Cover, it requires different techniques than
the reduction in Section 3.1.

     LEMMA A.1. There is an algorithm takes as input an r-uniform collection of subsets
    over  n , and produces the truth table of a partial Boolean function f such that the min-
imum size of a cover of  n with is equal to the minimum number of terms in a DNF
consistent with f . The algorithm runs in time n ¦ ¦ ¡ O r¡ and the number of variables of f is
O r log n ¦ ¦ ¡¤¡ .

     Proof. Let the r-uniform collection over  n be given.

     As in the proof of Lemma 3.2, we produce two indexed sets of vectors V ¢  vi : i   n 
and W ¢  wA : A   of length t satisfying the property  ¡ that for all A  and i  n ,
i  A if and only if vi  wA. Again, we specify V and then define W according to the rule that
for A  , wA is the bitwise OR of  vi : i  A . The construction of partial function f , given

V and W , is then the same as in the proof of Lemma 3.2, and again it follows that the size of

the minimum DNF consistent with f is equal to the size of the minimum cover of  n by .

    We now describe the construction of V . Let P be the set of pairs j  A¡ with A  and

j   n  A. The desired conditions on V can be restated as specifying that for all j  A¡  P:

          C j  A¡ : There is a bit position   t such that vj ¢ 1 and vi ¢ 0 for all
          i  A.

    If we choose v1 ¤¨ ¤¤ vn of length t at random where each bit is 1 independently with

probability 1 r, then for each j  A¡  P the probability that C j  A¡ does not hold is 1 
¡ 1
1   1  ¡  r¡  t    e t 3r, so the probability that v1 ¤ ¨ ¨!  vr fails to meet the requirements is at
r   r
¡ ¡ £ © most ¦ P ¦ e t 3r  ¦ ¦ ne t 3r. Thus if t 3r 1 ln ¦ ¦ n¡¨¡ this random choice succeeds with
MINIMIZING DNF FORMULAS  21

probability more than 1/2. This is enough for a randomized reduction. To make it determinis-
tic, we derandomize this construction using the method of conditional probabilities (see, e.g.,
[6]). This is routine but technical so we provide only a sketch. Let X j  A¡ be the random vari-

¥ able that is 1 if C j  A¡ fails. We want to choose v1 ¤ ¨ ¤¤ vr so that X ¢  j A¡ P X j  A¡ ¢ 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¤

The above argument says that under random choice Exp X   1 2. The key point for de-
randomizing is that if we fix any subset of the bits in v1 ¨¨¤ ¤ vr then it is straightforward to
compute the conditional expectation of X given this fixing in time ¦ ¦ n¡ O 1¡ ¡ . We can then
use the method of conditional probabilities to fix these bits one at a time always choosing the
value of the bit that does not increase the expectation. Once all bits are fixed we must have a
good choice for V .

     Clearly V and W can be constructed in time in time n ¦ ¦ ¡ O 1¡ with t ¢ O r log n ¦ ¦ ¤¡ ¡ .
Since the truth table has size 2t , outputting it takes time n ¦ ¦ ¡ O r¡ .

     Combining the above reduction with the modified reduction from Min-DNF(*) to Min-
DNF in Section 4.2 yields a reduction from r-Uniform Set Cover to Min-DNF. Setting r ¢
logN, where N is the truth table size, one can then apply inapproximability results for r-
Uniform Set Cover [17, 39] to show that Min-DNF cannot be approximated to within a factor
of  loglog N ¡ in polynomial time unless NP is in randomized quasipolynomial time.
